<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Death of a City: Elegy for Sarajevo
  -- A special report.; A People Under Artillery Fire Manage to Retain Humanity</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css" type="text/css"/>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
</head>
<body>
	<section epub:type="chapter">
        <p id="chapter">Chapter 4</p>
        <p><strong>Wisdom and Tears Of a Barkeeper</strong></p>
		<p>At night, the skyline was a facsimile of Baghdad during the
    gulf war -- with gunners' flares lighting the high-rises of the city center in
    silhouette, and tracer fire skipping across the sky.</p>

    <p>From a vantage point in the old town, fires blazed at every
    point of the compass, some of them huge conflagrations that burned for hours.</p>

    <p>The number of dead and wounded was another unknown, but
    gravediggers were hard pressed to keep up with the new bodies arriving by the
    hour.</p>

    <p>At Kovlaci Park above Bascarsija, 185 new graves, each with
    a coffin-shaped wooden marker bearing the Muslim emblems of a star and a crescent
    moon, lay row upon row on the hillside. The graves were piles of freshly turned earth
    beneath clusters of wild roses, carnations and violets.</p>

    <p>Shells hitting the hillside drove a steam-shovel operator
    who was digging the graves into the cover of a ridge abutment. While he took shelter
    there, two middle-aged women carrying plastic bags of bread were hit by a new blast.
    Both were killed.</p>

    <p>For Kemal Aljevic, the 45-year-old owner of a bar in
    Bascarsija called Alf, after the American television puppet character, the sight of
    the Kovlaci graves was too much. With tears streaming down his cheeks, Mr. Aljevic
    said that the Serbian gunners appeared to be repeating the destruction of Vukovar,
    the Croatian town of 45,000 that was reduced to rubble by artillery fire last
    year.</p>

    <p>"This will be three times worse than Vukovar," he said.</p>

    <p>As in Vukovar, the Serbs seem to use the heaviest weapons
    of the Yugoslav Army, which formally withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina three weeks
    ago and turned at least 55,000 men over to a new force of Bosnia's ethnic Serbs.</p>

    <p>One of two Sarajevo newspapers still being produced,
    Oslobodenje, quoted Yugoslav Army officers who had defected to the Bosnians as saying
    that weapons being used in the barrage included 155-millimeter howitzers,
    120-millimeter mortars, 104-millimeter tank cannon and 132-millimeter multiple-rocket
    launchers. The paper said a total of 4,000 tons of high explosives had been fired
    into the city.</p>

    <p>Some of the artillery shells are coming from a former
    Yugoslav Army barracks at Hampjesic, 20 miles east of Sarajevo, the officers
    reportedly added.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
