<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Death of a City: Elegy for Sarajevo
  -- A special report.; A People Under Artillery Fire Manage to Retain Humanity</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css" type="text/css"/>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
</head>
<body>
	<section epub:type="chapter">
        <p id="chapter">Chapter 3</p>
        <p><strong>Food and Hope Are Running Low</strong></p>
		<p>The conflict here had small beginnings early in April, when
    decisions by the European Community and the United States to recognize the new nation
    led to barricades being thrown up around the city by rival ethnic militias.</p>

    <p>Early in May, it got out of control after Alija
    Izetbegovic, the Muslim who is President of the new republic, was kidnapped by the
    Serbian forces, and Muslim and Croatian troops retaliated by ambushing a convoy of
    the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army as it evacuated an army headquarters in the city.</p>

    <p>The President, who was released in exchange for guarantees
    of safe passage for the convoy, was out on Marshal Tito Street in the center of
    Sarajevo this afternoon. He walked gingerly around piles of broken glass and rubble
    from the shattered facades of apartment buildings built during the time before World
    War I when Sarajevo was an outpost of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.</p>

    <p>The 67-year-old leader, a lawyer and economist who spent
    nearly 10 years in prison under Yugoslavia's Communist rulers for his writings on
    Muslim beliefs, sought to reassure scattered groups of people he met along the way.
    But he made no effort to hide his own anxiety after weeks of heavy shelling.</p>

    <p>"Are you scared?" he asked a group of militiamen standing
    guard with Kalashnikov automatic rifles under an archway leading into the Solomon
    Palace, a six-story apartment building that was once home to some of the city's
    leading Jews, many of whom died in the Nazi terror.</p>

    <p>"A little," one militiaman replied, shifting nervously in a
    denim jacket embroidered with the fleur-de-lis badge that is the emblem of the new
    republic.</p>

    <p>"I am afraid too," replied Mr. Izetbegovic, who has spent
    long periods in a basement bunker in a nearby Government building. "But we must hold
    out."</p>

    <p>For many here, that has become a prospect of appalling
    bleakness. Although the United Nations on Friday reached the outline of an agreement
    to take control of Butmir Airport, on the city's outskirts, from the Serbian forces
    and to open a corridor into town, there is little confidence here that the Serbs will
    carry it out.</p>

    <p>By lifting the siege, the Serbs would effectively
    acknowledge that they have lost the city, many in Saravejo believe. Already, all but
    a few of Sarajevo's suburbs are controlled by Bosnian territorial forces made up of
    Muslims, Serbs and Croats.</p>

    <p>But if relief supplies do not arrive soon, desperation may
    turn to catastrophe. Only a handful of Government services still operate, and those
    in skeletal state. No one seems to know how many people remain, but it appears to be
    at least half the city's prewar population of 560,000 -- possibly many more.</p>

    <p>The Serbian nationalist forces allow no food to pass
    through their roadblocks on the periphery of town, and supplies that have been
    sneaked past their gun positions on the hills have been minimal. Most families have
    only loaves of bread baked by the single bakery that continues to function, using
    reserve supplies of flour from silos that are in a part of town under Mr.
    Izetbegovic's control.</p>

    <p>To this, some families have added a thin gruel made of
    water and nettles taken from the lower slopes of the surrounding hills. With
    inventive cooking, and private supplies of flour, Sarajevans produce the likes of
    French bread and a sugared Turkish cake called kevlici.</p>

    <p>But no one outside the Government knows how long the flour
    supplies might hold out, and fear of starvation is widespread. When two Western
    reporters entered the city on Friday, one of the first people they encountered was a
    professor of biophysics from the medical faculty of Sarajevo University, Dr. Hamid
    Pasic.</p>

    <p>"I am hungry!" he said. "I am 76 years old, I am a
    professor, and I am hungry!"</p>

    <p>Those who venture out for food do so at great risk.
    Although some of the gunnery appears to be aimed at military targets, most of the
    rounds land in densely populated parts of the city. The sections of town taking the
    worst punishment include the central district and Bascarsija, an old quarter of
    mosques, narrow alleyways and wooden-front workshops and boutiques.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
