<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
    <title>The Death of a City: Elegy for Sarajevo
  -- A special report.; A People Under Artillery Fire Manage to Retain Humanity</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css" type="text/css"/>
    <meta charset="utf-8"/>
</head>
<body>
    <section epub:type="chapter">
        <p id="chapter">Chapter 5</p>
        <p><strong>Houses of Worship Become Targets</strong></p>
        <p>The destruction has reached every quarter of Sarajevo, and
    almost every landmark. Fifty of the city's 80 mosques have been damaged or destroyed,
    including the oldest in the Balkans, Tabacki Mesdid, which dates to 1450. The Morica
    Han, a 15th-century Turkish inn stop for caravans, and the Islamic Theological
    Faculty, also from the 15th century, were damaged.</p>

    <p>The main synagogue and the Roman Catholic cathedral have
    been hit, though only lightly damaged. The main broadcasting center and its
    transmitter have been repeatedly shelled; repairs at feverish speed have kept the
    radio and television stations on the air.</p>

    <p>The Serbian nationalists seem to have taken little care to
    avoid buildings of historic importance to the ethnic Serbs who live here, 38 percent
    of the city's population before the fighting.</p>

    <p>One building was extensively damaged by a shell that
    pierced its glass dome. It was the National Library, formerly the city hall, where in
    1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Hungary attended a reception minutes before
    he and his wife, Sophie, were assassinated by a 19-year-old Serbian nationalist,
    Gavrilo Princip. Half a mile away, at the site of the assassination, the museum
    dedicated to Mr. Princip has now been destroyed.</p>

    <p>The main Serbian Orthodox church in the city center has
    also been extensively damaged.</p>

    <p>Sites linked to the 1984 Olympics have come under fire,
    too. Both cupolas have been destroyed atop the former United States Consulate
    building, a neo-classical structure on a rise above the city center, which served as
    the Olympic museum. Its roof was penetrated by a shell, and all its windows were
    shattered.</p>

    <p>The hospitals are packed with the wounded, many with
    amputated limbs from shrapnel blasts. Doctors report an unusually high incidence of
    heart attacks and of psychological distress.</p>

    <p>With gasoline unavailable, many of the doctors walk miles
    to work through streets where every intersection offers clear sightlines to snipers
    in the hills. Along the way, hundreds of cars, buses and trams lie destroyed, many of
    them burned-out hulks.</p>

    <p>A lung specialist who walks back from the Vrazova Health
    Center every day spends her nights in a shopping-center storage room in the city's
    old quarter with her husband, a cardiologist.</p>

    <p>With them, on mattresses on the floor, are a taxi driver,
    dentist, fireman, electrical engineer, waiter and computer scientist, together with
    their families -- a cross-section of Sarajevo life, pressed together as they rarely
    were before the fighting. Amid occasional tears, there are moments of joy over chess
    games, crossword puzzles and surprise meetings with old friends from other parts of
    town.</p>

    <p>"You're alive!" a professor exclaimed to another who
    appeared in a shopping arcade on Saturday night, hugging him tightly for a full
    minute as both wept.</p>
    </section>
</body>
</html>
