<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Death of a City: Elegy for Sarajevo
  -- A special report.; A People Under Artillery Fire Manage to Retain Humanity</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css" type="text/css"/>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
</head>
<body>
	<section epub:type="chapter">
        <p id="chapter">Chapter 2</p>
        <p><strong>Symbol of Civility Now Symbol of Pain</strong></p>
		<p>Two months into a civil war that turns more murderous by
    the day, Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, is a skeleton of the
    thriving, accomplished city it was. It is a wasteland of blasted mosques, churches
    and museums; of fire-gutted office towers, hotels and sports stadiums, and of
    hospitals, music schools and libraries punctured by rockets, mortars and artillery
    shells.</p>

    <p>Parks have been pressed into service as emergency
    cemeteries, and the pathetic lines of graves march ever farther up the hillsides
    toward the gun emplacements.</p>

    <p>What is happening here, in a European city that escaped two
    World Wars with only minor damage, is hard to grasp for many of those enduring
    it.</p>

    <p>It is a disaster of such magnitude, and of such seeming
    disconnectedness from any achievable military or political goals, that those who take
    shelter for days in basement bunkers, emerging briefly into daylight for fresh
    supplies of bread and water, exhaust themselves trying to make sense of it.</p>

    <p>Many, like Mr. Smailovic, who played the cello for the
    Sarajevo Opera, reach for an anchor amid the chaos by doing something, however small,
    that carries them back to the stable, reasoned life they led before.</p>

    <p>Mr. Smailovic, 36 years old, spoke over the blasts of the
    shells that have poured down on the city unremittingly for the last 48 hours. The
    barrages by the Serbian forces seem to be a paroxysm of fury at their failure to
    capture the city after weeks of dumping thousands of tons of high explosives from the
    hillsides.</p>

    <p>He could have been speaking for all the survivors trapped
    here, in defiance of the Serbian nationalists' insistence that only the ethnic
    partitioning of the city, and of the republic, can bring them security.</p>

    <p>"My mother is a Muslim and my father is a Muslim," Mr.
    Smailovic said, "but I don't care. I am a Sarajevan, I am a cosmopolitan, I am a
    pacifist." Then he added: "I am nothing special, I am a musician, I am part of the
    town. Like everyone else, I do what I can."</p>

    <p>In Sarajevo, as in many cities, towns and villages across
    this former Yugoslav republic, Serbs, Muslims and Croats, the third major ethnic
    group in the population of 4.4 million, have lived for centuries side by side, so
    much so that their cultures, families and life styles have grown into each other --
    creating a society of striking depth and variety.</p>

    <p>They have done so in a landscape that is one of the most
    beautiful in Europe, a place of Alpine mountains and blue-green rivers, of terra
    cotta-roofed houses that cling to precipitous hillsides, of white stone mosques with
    green copper domes and pencil-slim minarets.</p>

    <p>Sarajevo, in a narrow valley bordered on all sides by
    mountains, has long been the symbol of this richly textured life, enchanting
    generations of travelers since the present city was established by a Turkish sultan
    in 1462.</p>

    <p>Now it is a symbol of another kind -- of a place where
    Muslims, Serbs, Croats, and other religious and ethnic minorities, including
    Albanians and a tiny population of Jews, suffer together. They endure the gunfire of
    Serbian nationalists who believe that the independent nation of Bosnia and
    Herzegovina proclaimed on March 2, and led by Muslims and Croats, will dominate and
    eventually persecute Serbs.</p>

    <p>From this conviction -- met with increasing ferocity in
    many parts of the republic by Muslims and Croats, some of whom have adopted tactics
    as brutal as those of the Serbs -- has grown the war that is draining the life from
    Sarajevo.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
