<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>The Death of a City: Elegy for Sarajevo
  -- A special report.; A People Under Artillery Fire Manage to Retain Humanity</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css" type="text/css"/>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
</head>
<body>
	<section epub:type="chapter">
        <p id="chapter">Chapter 6</p>
        <p><strong>Escape Mechanisms: Music and Disbelief</strong></p>
		<p>On a radio broadcast that was frequently drowned out by
    exploding shells, an announcer urged people to turn up the volume on the station's
    Bosnian patriotic songs and Beatles music. "We cannot kill these maniacs with guns,"
    he said, "so let's kill them with love and music."</p>

    <p>In an apartment nearby, with only a candle burning to deny
    the gunners a target, the 16-year-old daughter of a Muslim electrical engineer and
    his architect wife, Meliha Dzirlo, lingered at a piano into the small hours playing
    Beethoven's "Pathetique" Sonata and a polonaise by Chopin.</p>

    <p>Everywhere, when they were not arranging forays for food or
    water or exchanging names of those killed or wounded, people appealed for help from
    the outside world. After listening to a shortwave-radio account of the United Nations
    plans for relief convoys, Asim Hadzic, a 30-year-old Muslim who is a food-company
    salesman, shook his head.</p>

    <p>"It would be a good start but it isn't enough," he said.
    "We want military intervention."</p>

    <p>The doctor who walks every day to the Vrazova Clinic, a
    Muslim who, fearing for her house, asked not to be identified, took a wider view.</p>

    <p>"I can't believe this is all real," she said, gesturing
    toward a pile of rubble from an apartment building. "Here we are on the eve of the
    21st century -- in Europe, in a beautiful city and a country that offered people
    every possibility of a good life. How can such a thing happen? And how can a
    so-called civilized world allow it to continue?"</p>

    <p id="caption">Photos: A man reflecting at a grave yesterday in a newly
    reopened cemetery in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Many ethnic
    groups use the Serbian cemetery because it is considered the safest in the city. (pg.
    A1); After a night of heavy shelling, smoke and flames rise from the tallest building
    in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina. (pg. A6) (Agence France-Presse)
    Map of Yugoslavia showing location of Sarajevo. (pg. A6)</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
