<body>
  <h1 itemprop="headline" class="articleHeadline">The Death of a City: Elegy for Sarajevo
  -- A special report.; A People Under Artillery Fire Manage to Retain Humanity</h1>

  <h6 class="byline"><span itemprop="author creator" itemscope="" itemtype=
  "http://schema.org/Person"><span itemprop="name">By JOHN F. BURNS,</span></span></h6>

  <h6 class="dateline">Published: June 8, 1992</h6>

  <div class="articleBody">
    <span itemprop="copyrightHolder provider sourceOrganization" itemscope="" itemtype=
    "http://schema.org/Organization" itemid="http://www.nytimes.com"></span>

    <p itemprop="articleBody"><strong>SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, June
    7&mdash;</strong> As the 155-millimeter howitzer shells whistled down on this
    crumbling city today, exploding thunderously into buildings all around, a disheveled,
    stubble-bearded man in formal evening attire unfolded a plastic chair in the middle
    of Vase Miskina Street. He lifted his cello from its case and began playing
    Albinoni's Adagio.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">There were only two people to hear him, and both fled,
    dodging from doorway to doorway, before the performance ended.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Each day at 4 P.M., the cellist, Vedran Smailovic, walks to
    the same spot on the pedestrian mall for a concert in honor of Sarajevo's dead.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The spot he has chosen is outside the bakery where several
    high-explosive rounds struck a bread line 12 days ago, killing 22 people and wounding
    more than 100. If he holds to his plan, there will be 22 performances before his
    gesture has run its course.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Two months into a civil war that turns more murderous by
    the day, Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, is a skeleton of the
    thriving, accomplished city it was. It is a wasteland of blasted mosques, churches
    and museums; of fire-gutted office towers, hotels and sports stadiums, and of
    hospitals, music schools and libraries punctured by rockets, mortars and artillery
    shells.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Parks have been pressed into service as emergency
    cemeteries, and the pathetic lines of graves march ever farther up the hillsides
    toward the gun emplacements.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">What is happening here, in a European city that escaped two
    World Wars with only minor damage, is hard to grasp for many of those enduring
    it.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">It is a disaster of such magnitude, and of such seeming
    disconnectedness from any achievable military or political goals, that those who take
    shelter for days in basement bunkers, emerging briefly into daylight for fresh
    supplies of bread and water, exhaust themselves trying to make sense of it.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Many, like Mr. Smailovic, who played the cello for the
    Sarajevo Opera, reach for an anchor amid the chaos by doing something, however small,
    that carries them back to the stable, reasoned life they led before.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Mr. Smailovic, 36 years old, spoke over the blasts of the
    shells that have poured down on the city unremittingly for the last 48 hours. The
    barrages by the Serbian forces seem to be a paroxysm of fury at their failure to
    capture the city after weeks of dumping thousands of tons of high explosives from the
    hillsides.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">He could have been speaking for all the survivors trapped
    here, in defiance of the Serbian nationalists' insistence that only the ethnic
    partitioning of the city, and of the republic, can bring them security.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"My mother is a Muslim and my father is a Muslim," Mr.
    Smailovic said, "but I don't care. I am a Sarajevan, I am a cosmopolitan, I am a
    pacifist." Then he added: "I am nothing special, I am a musician, I am part of the
    town. Like everyone else, I do what I can."</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">In Sarajevo, as in many cities, towns and villages across
    this former Yugoslav republic, Serbs, Muslims and Croats, the third major ethnic
    group in the population of 4.4 million, have lived for centuries side by side, so
    much so that their cultures, families and life styles have grown into each other --
    creating a society of striking depth and variety. Symbol of Civility Now Symbol of
    Pain</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">They have done so in a landscape that is one of the most
    beautiful in Europe, a place of Alpine mountains and blue-green rivers, of terra
    cotta-roofed houses that cling to precipitous hillsides, of white stone mosques with
    green copper domes and pencil-slim minarets.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Sarajevo, in a narrow valley bordered on all sides by
    mountains, has long been the symbol of this richly textured life, enchanting
    generations of travelers since the present city was established by a Turkish sultan
    in 1462.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Now it is a symbol of another kind -- of a place where
    Muslims, Serbs, Croats, and other religious and ethnic minorities, including
    Albanians and a tiny population of Jews, suffer together. They endure the gunfire of
    Serbian nationalists who believe that the independent nation of Bosnia and
    Herzegovina proclaimed on March 2, and led by Muslims and Croats, will dominate and
    eventually persecute Serbs.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">From this conviction -- met with increasing ferocity in
    many parts of the republic by Muslims and Croats, some of whom have adopted tactics
    as brutal as those of the Serbs -- has grown the war that is draining the life from
    Sarajevo.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The conflict here had small beginnings early in April, when
    decisions by the European Community and the United States to recognize the new nation
    led to barricades being thrown up around the city by rival ethnic militias.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Early in May, it got out of control after Alija
    Izetbegovic, the Muslim who is President of the new republic, was kidnapped by the
    Serbian forces, and Muslim and Croatian troops retaliated by ambushing a convoy of
    the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army as it evacuated an army headquarters in the city.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The President, who was released in exchange for guarantees
    of safe passage for the convoy, was out on Marshal Tito Street in the center of
    Sarajevo this afternoon. He walked gingerly around piles of broken glass and rubble
    from the shattered facades of apartment buildings built during the time before World
    War I when Sarajevo was an outpost of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.</p>
  </div>

  <div class="articleBody">
    <p itemprop="articleBody">The 67-year-old leader, a lawyer and economist who spent
    nearly 10 years in prison under Yugoslavia's Communist rulers for his writings on
    Muslim beliefs, sought to reassure scattered groups of people he met along the way.
    But he made no effort to hide his own anxiety after weeks of heavy shelling.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"Are you scared?" he asked a group of militiamen standing
    guard with Kalashnikov automatic rifles under an archway leading into the Solomon
    Palace, a six-story apartment building that was once home to some of the city's
    leading Jews, many of whom died in the Nazi terror.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"A little," one militiaman replied, shifting nervously in a
    denim jacket embroidered with the fleur-de-lis badge that is the emblem of the new
    republic.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"I am afraid too," replied Mr. Izetbegovic, who has spent
    long periods in a basement bunker in a nearby Government building. "But we must hold
    out."</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">For many here, that has become a prospect of appalling
    bleakness. Although the United Nations on Friday reached the outline of an agreement
    to take control of Butmir Airport, on the city's outskirts, from the Serbian forces
    and to open a corridor into town, there is little confidence here that the Serbs will
    carry it out.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">By lifting the siege, the Serbs would effectively
    acknowledge that they have lost the city, many in Saravejo believe. Already, all but
    a few of Sarajevo's suburbs are controlled by Bosnian territorial forces made up of
    Muslims, Serbs and Croats.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">But if relief supplies do not arrive soon, desperation may
    turn to catastrophe. Only a handful of Government services still operate, and those
    in skeletal state. No one seems to know how many people remain, but it appears to be
    at least half the city's prewar population of 560,000 -- possibly many more. Food and
    Hope Are Running Low</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The Serbian nationalist forces allow no food to pass
    through their roadblocks on the periphery of town, and supplies that have been
    sneaked past their gun positions on the hills have been minimal. Most families have
    only loaves of bread baked by the single bakery that continues to function, using
    reserve supplies of flour from silos that are in a part of town under Mr.
    Izetbegovic's control.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">To this, some families have added a thin gruel made of
    water and nettles taken from the lower slopes of the surrounding hills. With
    inventive cooking, and private supplies of flour, Sarajevans produce the likes of
    French bread and a sugared Turkish cake called kevlici.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">But no one outside the Government knows how long the flour
    supplies might hold out, and fear of starvation is widespread. When two Western
    reporters entered the city on Friday, one of the first people they encountered was a
    professor of biophysics from the medical faculty of Sarajevo University, Dr. Hamid
    Pasic.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"I am hungry!" he said. "I am 76 years old, I am a
    professor, and I am hungry!"</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Those who venture out for food do so at great risk.
    Although some of the gunnery appears to be aimed at military targets, most of the
    rounds land in densely populated parts of the city. The sections of town taking the
    worst punishment include the central district and Bascarsija, an old quarter of
    mosques, narrow alleyways and wooden-front workshops and boutiques.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The toll has risen rapidly, particularly this weekend, when
    the Serbian gunners began their most merciless barrage. Every minute or two, with
    only a few pauses, shells slammed into apartment buildings and the remnants of
    commercial districts, each volley hitting with a blast that could be heard miles
    away.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">At night, the skyline was a facsimile of Baghdad during the
    gulf war -- with gunners' flares lighting the high-rises of the city center in
    silhouette, and tracer fire skipping across the sky.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">From a vantage point in the old town, fires blazed at every
    point of the compass, some of them huge conflagrations that burned for hours. Wisdom
    and Tears Of a Barkeeper</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The number of dead and wounded was another unknown, but
    gravediggers were hard pressed to keep up with the new bodies arriving by the
    hour.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">At Kovlaci Park above Bascarsija, 185 new graves, each with
    a coffin-shaped wooden marker bearing the Muslim emblems of a star and a crescent
    moon, lay row upon row on the hillside. The graves were piles of freshly turned earth
    beneath clusters of wild roses, carnations and violets.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Shells hitting the hillside drove a steam-shovel operator
    who was digging the graves into the cover of a ridge abutment. While he took shelter
    there, two middle-aged women carrying plastic bags of bread were hit by a new blast.
    Both were killed.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">For Kemal Aljevic, the 45-year-old owner of a bar in
    Bascarsija called Alf, after the American television puppet character, the sight of
    the Kovlaci graves was too much. With tears streaming down his cheeks, Mr. Aljevic
    said that the Serbian gunners appeared to be repeating the destruction of Vukovar,
    the Croatian town of 45,000 that was reduced to rubble by artillery fire last
    year.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"This will be three times worse than Vukovar," he said.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">As in Vukovar, the Serbs seem to use the heaviest weapons
    of the Yugoslav Army, which formally withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina three weeks
    ago and turned at least 55,000 men over to a new force of Bosnia's ethnic Serbs.</p>
  </div>

  <div class="articleBody">
    <p itemprop="articleBody">One of two Sarajevo newspapers still being produced,
    Oslobodenje, quoted Yugoslav Army officers who had defected to the Bosnians as saying
    that weapons being used in the barrage included 155-millimeter howitzers,
    120-millimeter mortars, 104-millimeter tank cannon and 132-millimeter multiple-rocket
    launchers. The paper said a total of 4,000 tons of high explosives had been fired
    into the city.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Some of the artillery shells are coming from a former
    Yugoslav Army barracks at Hampjesic, 20 miles east of Sarajevo, the officers
    reportedly added. Houses of Worship Become Targets</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The destruction has reached every quarter of Sarajevo, and
    almost every landmark. Fifty of the city's 80 mosques have been damaged or destroyed,
    including the oldest in the Balkans, Tabacki Mesdid, which dates to 1450. The Morica
    Han, a 15th-century Turkish inn stop for caravans, and the Islamic Theological
    Faculty, also from the 15th century, were damaged.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The main synagogue and the Roman Catholic cathedral have
    been hit, though only lightly damaged. The main broadcasting center and its
    transmitter have been repeatedly shelled; repairs at feverish speed have kept the
    radio and television stations on the air.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The Serbian nationalists seem to have taken little care to
    avoid buildings of historic importance to the ethnic Serbs who live here, 38 percent
    of the city's population before the fighting.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">One building was extensively damaged by a shell that
    pierced its glass dome. It was the National Library, formerly the city hall, where in
    1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Hungary attended a reception minutes before
    he and his wife, Sophie, were assassinated by a 19-year-old Serbian nationalist,
    Gavrilo Princip. Half a mile away, at the site of the assassination, the museum
    dedicated to Mr. Princip has now been destroyed.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The main Serbian Orthodox church in the city center has
    also been extensively damaged.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Sites linked to the 1984 Olympics have come under fire,
    too. Both cupolas have been destroyed atop the former United States Consulate
    building, a neo-classical structure on a rise above the city center, which served as
    the Olympic museum. Its roof was penetrated by a shell, and all its windows were
    shattered.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The hospitals are packed with the wounded, many with
    amputated limbs from shrapnel blasts. Doctors report an unusually high incidence of
    heart attacks and of psychological distress.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">With gasoline unavailable, many of the doctors walk miles
    to work through streets where every intersection offers clear sightlines to snipers
    in the hills. Along the way, hundreds of cars, buses and trams lie destroyed, many of
    them burned-out hulks.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">A lung specialist who walks back from the Vrazova Health
    Center every day spends her nights in a shopping-center storage room in the city's
    old quarter with her husband, a cardiologist.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">With them, on mattresses on the floor, are a taxi driver,
    dentist, fireman, electrical engineer, waiter and computer scientist, together with
    their families -- a cross-section of Sarajevo life, pressed together as they rarely
    were before the fighting. Amid occasional tears, there are moments of joy over chess
    games, crossword puzzles and surprise meetings with old friends from other parts of
    town.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"You're alive!" a professor exclaimed to another who
    appeared in a shopping arcade on Saturday night, hugging him tightly for a full
    minute as both wept.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">On a radio broadcast that was frequently drowned out by
    exploding shells, an announcer urged people to turn up the volume on the station's
    Bosnian patriotic songs and Beatles music. "We cannot kill these maniacs with guns,"
    he said, "so let's kill them with love and music." Escape Mechanisms: Music and
    Disbelief</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">In an apartment nearby, with only a candle burning to deny
    the gunners a target, the 16-year-old daughter of a Muslim electrical engineer and
    his architect wife, Meliha Dzirlo, lingered at a piano into the small hours playing
    Beethoven's "Pathetique" Sonata and a polonaise by Chopin.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Everywhere, when they were not arranging forays for food or
    water or exchanging names of those killed or wounded, people appealed for help from
    the outside world. After listening to a shortwave-radio account of the United Nations
    plans for relief convoys, Asim Hadzic, a 30-year-old Muslim who is a food-company
    salesman, shook his head.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"It would be a good start but it isn't enough," he said.
    "We want military intervention."</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">The doctor who walks every day to the Vrazova Clinic, a
    Muslim who, fearing for her house, asked not to be identified, took a wider view.</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">"I can't believe this is all real," she said, gesturing
    toward a pile of rubble from an apartment building. "Here we are on the eve of the
    21st century -- in Europe, in a beautiful city and a country that offered people
    every possibility of a good life. How can such a thing happen? And how can a
    so-called civilized world allow it to continue?"</p>

    <p itemprop="articleBody">Photos: A man reflecting at a grave yesterday in a newly
    reopened cemetery in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Many ethnic
    groups use the Serbian cemetery because it is considered the safest in the city. (pg.
    A1); After a night of heavy shelling, smoke and flames rise from the tallest building
    in Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina. (pg. A6) (Agence France-Presse)
    Map of Yugoslavia showing location of Sarajevo. (pg. A6)</p>
  </div>
</body>

